This week rather than classifying an input
using multiple categories, you're
going to build a model that will allow you
to identify if two inputs are equivalent.
In this video you will explore
triplets and how to use them for
training your model.
Let's see how this works.
Here are three questions where
the first one is, how old are you and
it is the anchor A.
The second one is a positive example,
P, what is your age.
And the third one, where are you from,
is a negative example N.
Recall that here positive and
negative are related to
whether a question has the same
meaning as the anchor or not.
These three components give rise to
triplets which are groups of anchors,
positive and negative examples.
Accordingly, triplet loss is the name for
a loss function that
uses these components.
The intuition behind the simplest
loss function that uses
triplets is to minimize the difference
between the similarity of A and N.
And the similarity of A and P.
This is equivalent to maximizing
the similarity between the anchor and
the positive example.
While minimizing the similarity
between the anchor and
their associated negative examples.
You already know that as a difference
gets bigger or smaller along the x axis,
the loss gets respectively bigger or
smaller along the y axis.
But no doubt when the diff
is less than zero,
the loss decreases
towards negative values.
And for some similarity functions,
this simple loss function can
even go to negative infinity.
However, you want your model to tell
apart positive from negative examples.
And at some point it is not essential for
the difference to continue decreasing.
So you could constrain the loss
function to take values greater than or
equal to zero, ensuring that learning
happens until the difference
between similarities is close or
equal to zero.
With this, the loss function now
doesn't take negative values.
However, you don't want your model to
have a barely acceptable performance.
You need your model to be confident enough
and distinguish between negative and
positive values with ease.
So you need your model to learn until
the model achieves a specific value for
the difference between similarities.
That's why you would want to use
a margin alpha in the triplet loss.
It ensures that learning
goes on until the difference
between the similarities is equal or
close to the margin value.
You can think of all these as shifting
the loss function a little to the left.
Let's say you chose alpha to be 0.2.
If the difference between similarities
is minimal, like negative 0.1, and
then if you add it to alpha equal to 0.2,
the result is still greater than zero.
This sum of the diff plus alpha results
any positive loss that tells the model to
learn from that example.
You can see this visually in the line
charts where the loss function is shifted
to the left by alpha units.
The diff is along the horizontal axis.
When the difference is less than zero but
small in magnitude,
the loss is greater than zero.
So if the difference is smaller
in magnitude than alpha,
then the loss function is positive and
the model gets the message that it
can still improve its performance.
In practice, alpha is hyper parameter.
You will implement the triplet loss with
a margin alpha for this week's assignment,
which follows the simple form.
Know that it is a function of the anchor,
positive and
negative example representations
derived from your neural network.
A small detail worth noting
in these explanations.
I've been using cosine similarity
because that's what you'll be using in
the programming assignments.
However, you could also use a distance
metric or other similarity functions
with appropriate modifications to the loss
function but you have to be careful.
You must interpret distance metrics as
the opposite of similarity functions.
The lower the distance between the two
vectors the more similar they are.
Recall that one example of a distance
metric is the Euclidean distance,
what you saw in previous
specialization courses.
Selecting triplets, A, P, and
N for training involves two steps.
First, select a pair of questions
that are known to be duplicates
to serve as the anchor and
positive example from the training set.
Second, select a question that is known to
be different in meaning from the anchor
to form the anchor and the negative pair.
If you were to select triplets randomly,
you would be likely to choose anchors,
positives, and negative examples that
will lead to losses close to zero.
And remember that the network
will have nothing to learn from
those triplets when the loss gets to zero.
So you can train more efficiently if you
choose triplets that create a challenge
to the model.
So instead of selecting random triplets,
you specifically select so
called hard triplets.
These are triplets that
are more difficult for
the model to tell apart the negative and
the positive example.
In those, the similarity between anchor
and negative is very close too but
they are still smaller than the similarity
between anchor and positive.
When the model encounters a hard triplet,
it needs to adjust its weight
to yield similarities that line
up with the real world labels.
So by selecting hard triplets,
you focus the training process and
the problematic cases.
So the model gets the most information
on how to improve its performance.
Here, I spoke about how hard triplets
are a way to improve the training process.
I also talked about the margin alpha and
the triplet loss function.
In the following video, you'll see how all
these concepts come together to help you
create a cost function for
training your model